Redefine quorum to allow all to vote (#820)
graphql/graphql-wg: GraphQL-TSC.md

| 2023 - 2024 | Nov 1, 2022      | Dec 1, 2022 | Jan 1, 2023 | Dec 31, 2024 |
| 2024 - 2025 | Nov 1, 2023      | Dec 1, 2023 | Jan 1, 2024 | Dec 31, 2025 |

> #### Resignation or removal of TSC members

Author: This is just a move to keep this section together and focused

The ballots may be public or private depending upon the situation, but the aggregate results should always be published.

### Defining a quorum of "attending" members

To balance preserving the voting ability of all TSC members with the desire for the voting process to remain efficient and avoid deadlocks, we define a valid quorum based on members' recent attendance of GraphQL Working Group meetings.

> A quorum is a majority (more than half, or 2/3 for a supermajority vote) of the TSC *attending members*. A quorum must cast a ballot in order for a vote to be valid.

Reviewer: This seems to explicitly exclude non-attending members from being able to count towards quorum. So if you have 6 attending members even if you can get 5 non-attending members and 3 attending to vote, you still haven’t achieved quorum. 

I think that probably matches the spirit of what we’re going for, so seems good to me.

A TSC *attending member* is a member who has attended one of the previous three meetings. Should a TSC member miss three consecutive meetings, they will no longer be counted when determining quorum (but may still vote). A member starts counting towards quorum as of attending a meeting.

### Voting process

Because we work in a distributed environment, the voting process must account for a range of time zones and schedules. Once the threshold of a quorum has been met and a vote is valid, one of these two critera must be satisfied to conclude a vote:

* A notice is sent via email that the vote will conclude in three business days, reminding those who haven't voted that they should do so. The vote will conclude at the end of this time.

> * The election results would not change with the addition of another vote.

Reviewer: I’m not sure this is what we want: this says if the results are 5-3 for a majority vote, then the vote is concluded. I think instead of “another” we need “the election results would be the same even if every not-yet-voting member cast the opposite vote”. Or “results could not change with the addition of other votes”

Author: Yeah, you guys are expressing similar concern - but both your sentiments is the intended rule. I'll clarify

> * The election results would not change with the addition of another vote.

Reviewer 2: I’m not comfortable with this, why is there a one vote threshold? Maybe 
```suggestion
* The election results would not change if all remaining TSC *attending members* (if any) were to vote.
```

Author: I think your intent is the same as what's here. We could make it more clear.

Eg for a majority vote, as soon as you get 6 yes votes (of 11 TSC) then there's no need to wait any longer for more people to vote. 

However you wouldn't want this to be based on attending membership since you want to allow room for others to vote. 

In other words, immediately cease collecting votes as soon as the next vote could not possibly affect the result

Reviewer 2: Right; but imagine you have:

```
Yes: 4
No: 2
```

The addition of another vote (`no`) would not change the result (4 yes/3 no); however the addition of _three_ more votes (three "no"s) could change the result: (4 yes/5 no).

My issue was with "another" taken to mean a singular vote.

I'm totally happy with `if all remaining members were to vote` rather than just the attending members, I was just guessing at your intent.

> Once a valid vote is concluded, the result is determined by the number of votes recieved at that time (as opposed to the total number of TSC members):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once a valid vote is concluded, the result is determined by the number of votes received at that time (as opposed to the total number of TSC members):
```

* For a simple majority (or supermajority), the votes in favor must exceed half (or 2/3) of the total number of votes.
* For the Condorcet method, all votes received at the time the vote is concluded are considered.

> TSC members are not required to vote. An abstention vote is not considered part of the total set of votes, nor towards a voting quorum.

Reviewer: Hmmm not sure this makes sense. Usually an explicit vote of abstention counts towards quorum (you’re saying “I was present, understood the argument, and do not care which way the result goes”) whereas an abstention via not voting doesn’t count towards quorum (as that’s saying you may not have had time to figure out what makes sense). We may want to have both a “present” and “abstain-do-not-understand-yet” vote.

Author: I think my worry is that if an abstain counts as a vote but we consider a passing result for majority based on yesVotes/allVotes then an abstain is equivalent to a no vote.

I think the only way you can make an abstain not affect the outcome is by also removing it from the denominator.

But if you had a bunch of people abstain from voting, would you still want to consider those towards meeting quorum for considering a vote valid? I suppose that's what a "present" vote would imply? Do we want to support that or should we require yes/no votes for measures to pass?

Reviewer: I would be OK with any of:
- an explicit abstention being impossible (i.e. the vote continues until quorum is reached and the deadline to keep voting passes)
- abstentions counting towards quorum but reducing the vote’s denominator for majority required
- abstention reducing the denominator without adding to the numerator both for quorum and also majority

An abstention not counting towards quorum is equivalent to the first, except it makes it more explicit that if you say you’re abstaining, your vote might still actually be required to close out the issue. Especially if there were 2 attending TSC members, you don’t want one of them to feel like it’s OK to abstain if their vote is in fact required to come to a decision: both of them really do need to keep digging into the issue until they have an explicit opinion, or we need to let one of them completely defer the option to the other to enable a quorum from both with a 1-vote majority.

Reviewer: Hmm taking those three examples out, if we had 3 attending members, then:
- in the first, you always need 2 to vote up or down for there to be quorum. If one votes yes and one no, it fails.
- In the second, you can have one person vote yes and one abstain. Quorum is achieved (2/3), and it will fail (1/2). Whereas if you have two people abstain and one vote yes, it will have quorum (3/3) and pass (1/1). 
- in the third, one person abstaining with one yes vote is not enough to reach quorum (1/2), while two abstaining and one voting achieves quorum (1/1) and still lets the one vote pass it (1/1).

> TSC members are not required to vote. An abstention vote is not considered part of the total set of votes, nor towards a voting quorum.

Reviewer 2: I don’t feel this is quite right; this should be a little analogous to a “conflict of interest” situation - i.e. the quorum should be recalculated as if the abstaining member were not an attending member. This reads as if they don’t count towards reaching the quorum but without also (potentially) reducing the quorum.

We should also have a rule for the minimum size of a quorum; e.g. 2 people.

Author: I don't know that I follow your concern. My thought was that an abstain can't simply count as a vote that's not yes, since that would make it equivalent to a no. So it needs to not count as a vote at all such that "a majority of votes" still holds. Also, if someone abstains, that shouldn't trigger a vote quorum either. You need a quorum of yes/no votes to make a vote valid. 

Is there more to this that I've missed?

I think I like the idea of a minimum quorum, but wouldn't that only happen in the case of extreme absence, in which case it might be possible minimum quorum can't be reached and things deadlock?

Author: Since quorum is "more than half of attending" then for cases of very low attendance: 4 attending means needing 3 for quorum. 3 attending means 2 for quorum. 2 attending also means 2 for quorum. 1 attending means 1 for quorum.

Reviewer 2: TL;DR: "nor towards a voting quorum" is ambiguous - does it mean that they would not count when calculating the quorum, or when calculating if the quorum was fulfilled?

Laying out a concrete example to explain my concern:

7 attending members.

Quorum is therefore 4.

4 attending members abstain.

Three remaining attending members vote (two for, one against).

No non-attending members vote.

You state abstentions are not considered "towards a voting quorum" so it's clear there's only 3 votes that count towards the quorum. However the quorum requirement is 4, therefore this vote is invalid due to too many abstentions? Effectively the abstention is a "no".

Therefore, I think that abstentions should be subtracted from the size of the pool used to calculate the quorum in the first place - 7 attending members less 4 abstentions is 3 remaining attending members. Quorum is thus 2, so the vote is valid, and the result (2 for, 1 against) is that the vote passes. This is similar to how someone would be removed from the quorum-determining pool in the case of conflict-of-interest.

Reviewer 2: > wouldn't that only happen in the case of extreme absence, in which case it might be possible minimum quorum can't be reached and things deadlock?

Yes, I'd prefer a deadlock over a single person (out of 11!) getting the one and only vote on the subject. I think that at least two people should have to vote for a change for the change to occur - "favour no change," right? :wink:

The only exception to this would be voting on new TSC members - should we all attend a conference and get hit by a meteor (and thus unable to vote) then the sole remaining TSC member should be able to appoint a new committee such that votes on other subjects may continue.

Author: Hopefully my last edit navigates these concerns.

I added definitions for present/abstain/recused and their impact on quorum that way people can have an informed impact on the process. I think this avoids the concern with the size of quorum dropping to a very low number, even 1. "Abstain" (or no reply) does not allow a vote to occur since the threshold remains the same but hinders progress towards it, where present/recused would either make progress towards that threshold or lower the threshold accordingly - but those are intentionally provided replies, not implied.

The only scenario in which the threshold for quorum can reach 1 in an unintentional way is if all but one member have not attended 3 meetings. That effectively gives the remaining person full power, and I think this is a good thing. This is the hit-by-meteor scenario.

A quorum of more than half (or two-thirds for a supermajority vote) of the TSC *attending* members must cast a ballot in order for a vote to be valid.

### Voting process

Because we work in a distributed environment, the voting process must account for a range of time zones and schedules. Once the threshold of a voting quorum has been met and a vote is valid, one of these two critera must be satisfied to conclude a vote:

* A notice is sent via email that the vote will conclude in three business days, reminding those who haven't voted that they should do so. The vote will conclude at the end of this time.
* The election results would not change with the addition of another TSC member's vote.

Once a valid vote is concluded, the vote outcome is determined as follows:

* For a simple majority (or supermajority), the votes in favor must exceed 50% (or 66%) of the total of, as of the time the vote is concluded:
  * the number of TSC *attending* members.
  * the number of members who are not considered a TSC *attending* member but did cast a vote.

> * For the Condorcet method, all votes received at the time the vote is concluded are considered.

Reviewer 3: I had trouble understand this paragraph, would something like this rephrasing work:

> A simple majority requires more than 50% of the TSC attending members to vote in favor. 

I don't recall us referencing the Cordorcet method elsewhere. If this is the first/only time referencing the Condorcet method, considering in-lining the relevant parts and eliding the term altogether.

Reviewer: But more than 50% of the attending members isn’t quite right. 

It’s:
- take the sum of attending members and non-attending members who voted
- Majority is based on that sum, so >50% of whatever the number in the first step.

Author: Cordorcet has been in here since the beginning, it's referenced two headings up - we use it for multiple-winner votes (eg elections)

Let me see if I can refine the explanation of this - I agree that it's hard to reason about

Reviewer 3: Looks like I need more coffee, thanks guys, sorry for the noise, no other comments from me.

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

Consider this scenario for a simple majority vote:

* 6 of 11 TSC members are considered *attending* members by having attended at least two of the last five meetings.
* Being a simple majority, more than half of this 6 (so 4 or more) must cast ballots to consider the vote valid. 4 ballots are cast.
* An email is sent out reminding more members to cast a vote within three business days.
* 1 additional TSC *attending* member casts a vote.
* 2 members who are not considered an *attending* member also cast a vote.
* The vote is concluded.
* A total of 7 ballots have been cast

> * A majority is determined relative to the number of *attending* members (6) plus the number of non-attending but voting members (2), totaling 8.

Reviewer: I don't know why this was confusing to me on first read, but given the numbers provided I was able to reverse engineer the algorithm to mean what it says (the base 100% number used to evaluate whether majority is reached is all attending members, voting or not, plus any voting but not attending member).

It's in the example so it's not required to be editorially perfect, and also after reading 2-3 times it's very clear and I can't un-realize again to figure out what wording would be more clear without muddying the example.

Reviewer 2: I had the same process.

Author: Yeah :/ I think I'm missing a defining term for this
